okay good morning
everybody let's start with a riddle this
morning why don't plants have
brains why don't plants have
brains that we know of they don't need
them
because why don't they need
it it rains so okay it's CU part of the
answer don't have room for it maybe I
don't know there's some pretty big
plants out there bigger than us they
aren't like mobile they aren't mobile so
we are going to finish lecture 10 today
and we're going to move on to a two-part
lecture on really the fundamentals of
Robotics which we've been kind of
putting off for a while now which is the
problem of how to get from from point A
to point B so animals have hit on one
General strategy about how to survive
and thrive in this world which is
instead of waiting for the rain the mate
the food to come to us we go to it
plants have adopted the complimentary
strategy which is cross your fingers and
hope that the resources you want will
eventually come to you so what are
brains for um there is no simple answer
to that but what brains were originally
for was to orchestrate movement
everything else that brains do including
human brains are a hack or a series of
hacks on top of that so we're going to
talk about the origins of locomotion and
really dig into the challenges about why
moving from point A to point B is so
challeng
alling and how once you start to solve
that problem of self-displacement moving
yourself from point A to point B it
provides the foundation on which all the
other building blocks of intelligence
can be built upon okay A little preview
of where we're heading back to logistics
for a moment uh we will finish lecture
10 uh in a moment and then we will move
on to lecture 11 legged
Locomotion uh today under grads you are
moving on to assignment 7 uh hopefully
most of you successfully wrestled with
refactoring your code more or less uh I
know through office hours that some of
you are struggling a little bit hold
tight don't stress um assignment seven
is coming and assignment 8 will be
assigned next week but then you've got a
little bit of breathing room for the
spring recess so if you are starting to
fall behind you're going to have a
little bit of breathing room to catch up
in two weeks time um when it comes to
the refactoring how important is it that
we're like exactly on your intent of how
we refactored it versus just like being
aware of how it works for us absolutely
so if I may summarize your question do
you need to follow the letter of the law
or the spirit of the law the answer is
the latter you do not necessarily need
to follow exactly what I what I'm asking
for in refactoring the spirit of of
course is for you to try and clean up
and modularize your code so you
understand it better right for most of
you I'm going to guess that at this
point your code base is getting large
enough that you're starting to forget
where this variable is where is motor
values where the synapses how do I
update them that is part of the reason
for this for this refactoring and
cleaning things up so your code base is
more clean more structured it's easier
for you to dive back into it and find
what you need at a moment's notice in
order to push on through seven 8 n and
10 and ultimately your final project for
you to be successful in your final
project and be able to quickly identify
all the parts of the evolutionary
algorithm and improve that or quickly
identify all the parts of the neural
controller for your robot and improve
that you need to have a clean
modularized code base make sense that
being said within constraint so that you
can show us what we want to see at the
end of assignment six all
good okay those taking the course for uh
graduate study uh the second
differentiable assignment is now
available in which you're going to be
adding Springs to connect together the
mass points that you created in the
differentiable assignment
one uh grad students that are have made
it this far you realize obviously that
you're doing D1 through through D5 in
collab which is a browser based uh
programming environment in order to
clear the uh level the the play ground
for everyone so we don't have all the
installation issues we had with lud Bots
everybody is using exactly the same
resources which is Google's resources
yeah the other reason we're doing
everything in collab is so that you can
access the GPU resources that collab uh
that Google makes available through
collab you don't necessarily need those
GP resources yet because we're not
really doing any heavy optimization in
collab
yet however some of the grad students um
there are little prompts especially in
D2 that challenge you to actually start
to do some differentiable optimization
of your robot in its current state um be
careful if you do too much compute
within coab you can get bumped off by
Google for a day or a week or possibly
longer so for those of you that are
coding stuff up in go in collab Go
Lightly for
now when you get to D5 when you're
really going to do some differentiable
uh optimization or some differentiable
design of your robot we'll see how
things stand at that point if you're
able to run the codebase out R if you're
able to run your codebase outside of
collab on your own machine using GPU
resources that's fine too for now just
be
careful any other questions things that
have cropped up with the differentiable
assignments I know that one student was
struggling with actually viewing uh the
movie or viewing her simulation in the
collab window has anybody else had this
problem did have you managed to solve it
yet I just did what you said download it
and put it in the vcl player okay all
right so it's not an ideal solution but
for now if you can't see the simulation
in collab you're going to have to
download it every time you make a change
to the code which is a little annoying
so at some point you may want to just
wean yourself off collab and run it
locally we'll see I'll keep working on a
solution to
that any other questions about any of
the
assignments no okay uh looking ahead to
next week uh I am going to be traveling
to a workshop in the UK so there will be
no inclass instruction on Tuesday and
Thursday do not come to class next
Tuesday and next Thursday I will record
uh Tuesday next Tuesdays and Thursdays
lectures and I will drop them uh into
these cells at the time we usually meet
so hopefully for you there's not much of
a disruption to the way you are
currently absorbing this
course um when I travel uh and we miss
class I make it up to you by bringing
back something good to eat from the
country that I'm going to which in this
case is the UK so uh I will hold on to
what I bring back for you be sure to be
here on class in class the Tuesday after
spring recess and I will make it worth
your while Fair Deal that mean you do
and don't have office hours on that good
question it's a five hour difference so
I don't know whether I will be able to
host live office hours youon you won't
be I won't be here if if they're office
hours they will be remote I would say
probably to be on the safe side if you
want me uh the first week of March here
send me an email and let me know and we
can either do things through email or
set up a one-on-one Zoom meeting I think
that's probably better than trying to
orchestrate office
hours make sense
Fair okay all right so uh where were we
we were working our way through some of
the initial experiments in the field of
evolutionary robotics and we are
finishing with this last one which is
really not very much of a minimal
cognition experiment we've got a not
very uh not minimally complex neural
controller of this robot it's a
relatively complicated neural controller
and the body of the robot itself is also
anthropomorphic there's a lot going on
in terms of body and
brain we ended last time by focusing in
on the 47th and 48th
neuron inside this 48 neuron uh ctrn
that's controlling this robot and we
were looking at the ways in which the uh
investigators in this
experiment extracted signals from these
two neurons and interpreted that
extracted signal as the robot telling
the investigators whether the robot
thinks it's in contact with the sphere
or whether it's in contact with an
ellipsoid there's some simple ways we
could do it if the value of 47 is
greater than the value of 48 that's the
robot telling us it thinks it's in
contact with the sphere if 48 is firing
more strongly than 47 that's the robot
telling us it thinks it's in contact
with the ellipsoid that's not what the
investigators did what the investigators
did with something more complicated than
that which was to watch the values of
neuron for 7 and the value of neuron 48
during the last 5% of the time steps of
the simulation remember that in a phase
diagram in a 2d phase diagram like we
have here we're watching two values 47
and 48 and we're looking at what their
values are at a given point in time then
we're looking at a given point in time
then we're looking at what their values
are at the next point in time next point
in time next point in time and what we
get is a trajectory that crawls through
this two-dimensional space and reports
out how these two values are changing
during the last five% of the robot
interacting with whatever object we
placed in front of it so far so good
okay uh the first thing that the
investigators do at the end of a
simulation is draw a bounding box around
found a trajectory that was produced
when the robot was in contact with the
sphere remember the investigators know
but the robot doesn't know or we don't
know whether the robot knows so in this
case the investigators have placed a
sphere s underneath the robot's hand
during the eth trial so we're going to
draw a rectangle
r a rectangle R around the uh around the
trajectory produced when the robot was
in contact with the sphere during the
eth trial again I'm not a big fan of
this notation but this is what they used
so we'll go with it so we've got R Subs
sub the r representing a rectangle so
far so good okay they take the same
ctrnn drop it back inside the robot
after resetting the robot and now they
place an ellipsoid underneath the
robot's palm and the C andn starts
firing uh sensor values flow to motor
neurons the robot starts moving and
manipulating this ellipsoid and again
the investigators watch in this case
what the trajectory do the trajectory of
neurons 47 and 48
do when the robot is in the presence of
an
ellipsoid during the eth trial or the
eth Plus oneth trial so far so good
question so the face diagram is that so
that Arc is that the activation of the
neurons it's the activation of the
neurons yeah so here's our visual
representation or our geometric
representation of what's going on here's
the mathematical representation of
exactly the same thing question reason
start zero ah yeah
so let's start at zero so during the
first time step of the simulation we
place the robots hand on top of the
object we set all the values of the
output neurons to zero and you're right
we actually do start at 0 Zer the robot
starts doing something during the first
95% of the time steps of the simulation
and then this is what happens during the
last 5% of the simulation good point I
just wasn't drawing that part and same
thing here right for the ellipsoid the
robots these two values start at 0 0 and
maybe for for a while the robot is doing
the same
thing and then eventually this happens
um you might have already mentioned this
but is that last 5% like an orbit like
like is the last 5% the same as the 5%
that would happen after good question so
does this pattern repeat itself who
knows it depends on all of the settings
of this CNN we're just describing a
hypothetical situation with one ctrnn
which in our example we've only
evaluated that curin n twice once on the
robot in the presence of the sphere and
a second time with the robot in the
presence of an ellipsoid maybe it would
draw a a cyclical pattern maybe it would
repeat itself maybe the robot rocks its
hand back and forth over the top of the
object in which case 47 and 48 might
oscillate back and forth maybe the robot
I'll draw it over here maybe the robot
rocks its hands back and forth and comes
to a stop over the
object maybe the object maybe the robot
just is randomly manipulating the object
and we get some random trajectory it
depends it depends on the settings of
the ctrnn the investigators are not
forcing this they're just at this point
in the experiment watching and recording
what values of 47 and 48 a given CNN
produce so far so good
okay all right so let's go back to the
math for a moment so uh they're defining
these bounding rectangles and they're
going to define the bottom left vertex
of the the rectangle as the minimum
values of 47 and
48 and they're defining the top right
corner or the top right vertex of the
bounding box to be whatever the maximum
value of 47 was there's the maximum
value of
47 and the maximum value of
48 you'll notice there's a whole bunch
of other math sitting inside here what
is that math where is that coming
from hopefully it looks familiar is that
the activation absolutely right so
here's our activation function here it
is sitting in here and here so you'll
remember hopefully you remember during
our discussion about C tier and NS the
value inside a neuron the raw value can
be very large very positive or very
negative but when we go to read out or
extract the value out of a neuron we
pull it through the activation function
we add the bias we pull it through the
activation function and we get a value
back between minus one and one or zero
and one doesn't really matter for our
purposes we're squashing that value
Emily umor is it is it are
they connected being simple or is
there yeah so what is the connectivity
pattern inside the ctrnn is it fully
connected most of the ctrnn we've seen
so far we were wiring up every ner to
every other neuron is that the case in
this ctrnn and the the answer actually
you can see it in the visual
representation and if you're paying
attention you can also read it out of
the equations so they're they're
connected to the internal fully
connected
but not like directly to each other
absolutely so this is not a fully
connected Network you can see that for
neurons uh 23 through
30 which is uh down here these are all
fully connected to themselves and then
they connect out to the motor neurons
none of the motor neurons are connected
to any of the sensor neurons and none of
the sensor neurons directly connect to
the motor
neurons why did they make these
particular design decisions who knows
they don't give their reasons in the
paper seems kind of arbitrary to me yeah
I was going to ask like when you're
designing like the architecture of one
of these like is the like obviously like
the recurrence matters but generally
like you you kind of do just make
choices arbitrarily and train it right
another dirty secret of AI the choice of
cognitive architecture how you wire up
all the neurons in your neural network
kind of arbitrary not completely
arbitrary we've learned a few things
over the decades but it is really
difficult to know how how to establish
the appropriate cognitive architecture
what should be wired up to what to make
learning or in our case Evolution run
more smoothly yet another open problem
in AI I saw a professor saying recently
it's more like Alchemy than it is like
chemistry it's more like Alchemy than it
is like chemistry absolutely yes it is
somewhat arbitrary in this particular
experiment uh no not casting any shade
on the investigators I know them quite
well it was kind of an arbitrary choice
I think in this case Okay some things
are known as was just pointed out um
probably good to have recurrent
Connections in there for a lot of tasks
it's helpful for the robot to be able to
remember things that have occurred in
the recent
past okay all right back to our back to
our example here uh our cartoon example
here at this moment in time the
investigators have recorded
I've
recorded the activations of 47 and
48 uh from a presentation of the sphere
and one presentation of the
ellipsoid remember that for each ctrnn
we're going to evaluate that CNN 16
times we're going to set the robot's
initial position to position a and then
expose it to this sphere put it back to
a this sphere a sphere a sphere a
ellipsoid a ellipsoid a ellipsoid a
ellipsoid eight times take the same curn
n evaluate it 9 through 16 times
starting the robot's initial position at
B then in position B expose it to the
sphere reset the arm to B put the sphere
back under B sphere B sphere B ellipsoid
B ellipsoid B ellipsoid B ellipsoid 16
evaluations of an individual CN so far
on the board board I've only drawn two
of those
16 let's go back to the second
presentation of the sphere we presented
the sphere once to the robot now we're
going to present the sphere a second
time and we're going to rotate the
sphere horizontally under the robot's
Palm by a small
amount tell me about what 47 and 48 are
going to do in this new
case
it's going to do exactly the same thing
and we're going to get a second R Subs
sub that's identical to the first
one let's skip ahead let's imagine that
this particular pattern was produced
when the ellipsoid at this angle was
placed under the robot's Palm we replay
the same CNN but now we place the
ellipsoid back under the robot's palm
and rotate the ellipsoid a little bit
tell me about how 47 and 48 are going to
behave in this
case it'll it'll just look different
it'll just look different I don't know
what it's going to look like again it's
going to start here and do something for
the first 95% of the time and then do
something different during the last 5%
and we're going to put another bounding
rectangle around this one where this
rectangle represents another present of
the
ellipsoid under the eth trial so far so
good so at the end we're going to end up
with uh 16 bounding rectangles eight of
them are going to be lying more or less
right on top of one another and the
other eight are going to be distributed
somewhere uh in this two-dimensional
phase diagram everybody with me so
far okay we'll skip ahead a little bit
we we'll we'll assume that we finished
all 16
presentations of the objects to this
ctrnn and the last thing we're going to
do to finish up the evaluation of this
one
ctrnn is we're going to place another
bounding box around all of the sphere
bounding rectangles so we're going to
place a c Subs sorry this is getting a
little messy hopefully you could do a
better job we're going to place another
bounding rectangle called C for these
are the things that are classified as
the sphere from the robots perspective
and we're going to place another
bounding box around all the r sub
DS I should have brought a differently
colored marker to class today we're
going to put another one here a big
bounding rectangle around all of these
and these correspond to the category of
ellipsoid so so far so good okay we have
not yet said anything about the fitness
function for this experiment verbally
I've told you that the investigators
want this robot to be able to
distinguish between spheres and
ellipsoids what's the final step do you
think we need to calculate the fitness
function or the fitness value we need to
obtain one floating Point number which
represents how well the robot does at
distinguishing between spheres and
ellipsoids could you just like find a
number that
classifies well remember that the sphere
box we're placing that around all of the
activations of 47 and 48 when the robot
was actually in the presence of the
sphere and we've placed a bounding box
around all the activities of 47 and 48
when the robot was in the presence of
the
ellipsoid what do we do with C subs and
C subd to derive a single number we comp
the area the area of rectangle we could
compute the area of C subd we could
compute the area of C subs and then what
do we want to do with those two areas
those are two numbers yeah we compare
like they're close
together so you have if they're close to
together we're getting close to the
answer now other ideas do we want to
maximize the difference between maximize
the difference between the areas or
sorry sorry the the centers of them
maybe maximize the difference between
the centers we're getting we're getting
closer you also want to minimize the
area maybe minimize the area of the box
so if we want to maximize the distance
between the centers
you can imagine two massive
C's C subs and C subd imagine these are
huge so these two distances are also
pretty
huge um I was just gonna say we also
want
to have them be like the distance needs
to be on a certain axis right because if
we were just maximizing the distance you
could have
the categories be like totally FL and
maybe maybe other
ideas minimize overlap that's it that's
it minimize overlap we want the robot to
have maximally different felt
experiences when it's in the presence of
these two different objects everybody
got everything inside here I'm going to
erase it okay that's the key to this
whole complicated long experiment is to
minimize the overlap between these
bounding boxes what we want ideally is
whenever the robot experiences the
sphere it does something like this and
whenever it experiences the
ellipsoid it does stuff like this
remember that both sets of trajectories
are starting from here we want the robot
to diverge its
experiences we've heard that idea before
we're placing the robot in the presence
of two different objects and we're
creating a fitness function that is
selecting for or rewarding for uh
increasingly felt differences from the
robots
perspective where have we heard this
before we heard this last last
class we're trying to evolve the robot
to actively categorically perceive its
world and one way to do that is to reach
out in the world and say I don't know is
this piece of fruit is this food or is
this poison I remember that if it's this
color and it feels like this that's
actually a bad thing I can't quite tell
so let's reach out in the world and do
stuff to magnify the difference between
uh categories that's what this Fitness
function is going to select for to
minimize the overlap between these
bounding boxes in this cartoon example
on the board at the moment there is zero
overlap so where is the fact that the
bounding boxes are differentiating
between ellipsoids and spheres versus
like differences that these neurons are
creating between the objects that's it
47 and 48 behave differently they report
similar they're going to the fitness
function is going to select for the 47
and 48 to behave similarly when in the
presence of the
sphere and behave similarly in the
presence of ellipsoids regardless of
where the how the ellipsoid is placed
under the palm of the robot and 47 and
48 should behave very
differently when it's in the presence of
these different objects yeah okay let's
assume we've done Evolution and we
actually have evolved a CTI andn that
causes the robot to do this to do this
exact thing and now we take the
ellipsoid again and we put it back under
the palm of the robot but we rotate the
ellipsoid or we place it at some
particular horizontal position under the
palm of the robot that that robot or
that c tyann never saw during
Evolution how do we know whether the
robot knows that it's in the presence of
an
ellipsoid um well we would had a store
like the bounding boxes from before
right to decide if it is like whatever
trajectory of traces is in either one
exactly right so for that evolved CNN we
have C subs and C subd we know that for
the ctrnn if we place uh an ellipsoid
under the robot's Palm in a new
configuration and 47 and
48 do this that's the robot telling us
this is an ellipsoid if we place an
ellipsoid under the robot's palm and 47
and 48 do this this that's the robot
telling us I'm in the presence of a
sphere the robot is wrong in that case
what if it place a trajectory that's
like not in one of your Bing boxes what
if we place the ellipsoid under the palm
and it does something like this what is
the robot telling
us I saw a bunch of you do this exactly
the robot says I don't
know that's
it okay all right that's the intuition
let's look at the actual ual Fitness
function FF again terrible notation here
FF is a single variable they're going to
set the fitness function to be the sum
of two different
terms um FS1 and FS2 are just sitting
here by themselves there's no negative
signs in front of them they're not on
the denominator so whatever F1 and F2
are F1 and F2 should be maximized an
optimal robot gets very uh positive
values of fub1 and positive values of
F2 let's actually start with f sub2
because we were just talking about F
sub2 if you look at F sub2 inside you'll
notice there's an
intersection sign and this is exactly uh
the point that Eric was pointing out
here is that we are trying to minimize
this intersection is on the right hand
side of a minus sign we are trying to
minimize the area of the overlap between
C subs and C
subd we're trying to
minimize this area this is C subd and
this is C
Subs what's going on in the denominator
why is there a denominator um you're
like normalizing over the biggest for
the smallest area of
the yep absolutely right so this you can
imagine a perverse instantiation
case where this is C
subd
and this is C Subs C Subs is really
small there's actually quite a bit of
overlap between these two boxes the
robot actually can't tell the difference
very well between C subs and C subd in
this case so this denominator is
guarding against this particular case of
perverse instantiation and the fact that
it's there is usually a pretty strong
hint that the investigators probably ran
this experiment without this denominator
to start with and probably got something
like this and then said oh yeah right
okay normalize by the smallest of the
two bounding
boxes so does that have the effect of
trying to also like maximize the area
does this Fitness function also exert
evolutionary pressure to maximize the
size of the boxes great
question
thoughts I don't think so but it's a
good question I'm not 100% sure it might
be something to run and
see so if they wanted to could they have
like create a machine learning algorithm
to kind of create the lines that
separate the boundaries and then like to
not have it be like it doesn't really
know it or just in like it's more on
this side so it's to be it's more here
so they could have there's an infinite
number of ways they could have done this
right so your suggestion is interesting
we force it to just draw a line and
distinguish you're forcing the robot
then into making one of two choices it
has to say I think it's the sphere it's
on this side of the line or it's on this
side of the ellipsoid I like this
solution because there's actually three
options available to the robot the robot
can say I think it's an
ellipsoid I think it's a sphere or I
don't
know okay you notice that f sub2 is a
conditional so the robot gets or the
ctrnn gets Fitness points if F sub one
is greater than or equal to one if F sub
one which we haven't talked about yet is
less than one the robot isn't able to
get this F sub one is dinner and F sub2
is the dessert you don't get you don't
get your dessert if you don't finish
your dinner the this particular Fitness
function is an incremental Fitness
function we've seen this before when we
saw the Gantry robot this Fitness
function is set up so that Evolution
will evolve cnns that do very well get
better and better and better at F1 and
then when a CNN appears in the evolving
population of CNN's that gets an F1
above one then it also starts to collect
points for
this okay so let's have a look at F sub
one f sub1 is a function of d sub which
is the ukian distance between the object
and the center of the palm of the robot
at the end of the
trial and duub Max is the maximum
possible distance the robot's Palm can
get from the
object what is F1 selecting
for they want the hand to stay on the
object this is a very strong hint
actually it's a mandatory requirement
that CER and NS control the robots
Motors so that the hand stays in contact
with the object
because this robot has no cameras it
can't see the object it's got to feel it
in order to know the difference between
the objects everybody see that you can
imagine that starting from either
position a or position B here
99.99999% of random CNS you create are
going to cause the arm to do things like
this and maintain very little and
temporary contact with the object it's
going to be super hard and take you
years to start to evolve a CNN that
actually can distinguish between the
objects so they're building in some
pretty strong intuition that they have
about this problem which is that if
you're going to distinguish between
objects by touching them then touch
them everybody see that
okay okay here we go I'm going to turn
out the lights for this one uh hopefully
you can see this maybe I'll try
maximizing
this yeah that's
better okay here we go you're going to
watch what we're going to watch now is a
video of the robot being controlled by
one of the most fit cnns so the
evolutionary algorithm has run and has
produced a ctrnn that minimizes the
overlap between C subs and C subd while
you're watching this video and I'll just
put it on continuous loop here I want
you to jump back and forth between
watching what the robot actually does
and what's going on in the bottom left
of the screen and I apologize about the
colors uh it's a little hard to
see what is the robot
doing what is the robot quote unquote
saying trying to roll it straight back
and roll it straight back back on a
straight line that calls Sphere not okay
so some good observations here obviously
the robot has or the CN has hit on a
strategy of just rolling the object
backwards and the observation is that if
the robot pulls the object back and it
rolls back in a more or less straight
line that seems to correspond with the
robot saying it's a sphere otherwise it
says it's an
ellipsoid other obervations like curling
it fingers back it's curling its fingers
back a little
bit is there actually a difference
between the sphere and the ellipsoid is
there actually a difference between the
sphere and the ellipsoid you're doing
passive uh categorical perception you're
trying to perceive at a distance the
difference between these two objects
it's not easy is it they made this hard
on the robot the major and minor axes of
the ellipsoid are very similar to one
another this is a very spherical
ellipsoid but yes these investigators
were mean but not diabolical there
actually is a difference it's just a
subtle
difference my question is that like
would this strategy if it R it like
straight on the minor axis it would like
it wouldn't be able to tell I don't
think okay but also the the simulation
time like oh I guess the fingers help to
because it's curling it fingers remember
there's a lot going on here the robot's
getting a lot of touch and propri
receptive information and its fingers
its wrist its elbow its shoulder there's
a lot there's tons of subtle differences
going on in this video between the case
of the sphere and the case of the
ellipsoid some of which you can see some
of which you can barely see and some of
which you can't
see it's a great example of again
thinking about things is misleading the
robot doesn't need to do something
crazily different in all cases from the
robot's perspective these cases feel
very differently they don't look very
different to you
presumably tell me I get I apologize the
blue arrow is hard to see in the bottom
left what's what's up with the blue
arrow what is the blue arrow what is it
representing classifying it's
classifying how how how did they know
how to draw the blue arrow during the
rendering of this video so it's like
sitting up until the phase diagram goes
into one of the so if 47 if the value of
neurons 47 and 48 at the given time step
of a frame in this video If 47 and 48
are
outside are outside a bounding box that
they draw the arrow straight up if 47
and 48 wander inside to C Subs the arrow
switches and points to S to sphere if
the trajectory wanders back out and
wanders into C subd that's the robot
saying I'm in the presence of the
ellipsoid you know if they tested it
with like different sizes we're going to
see some more some examples of that in a
moment so if you watch if you watch the
blue Arrow the blue arrow is the robot
saying to us I don't know I don't know
oh it's the sphere no wait a second no
it's the ellipsoid yeah it's the
ellipsoid it's the ellipsoid it's the
ellipsoid next presentation I don't know
ellipsoid sphere ellipsoid it's the
sphere it's not sure and then it
converges most of the time on the right
answer everybody see that okay this is
the best evolved ctrnn and what you're
watching is a video of playing that CNN
back in initial position
a I'm going to show you exactly the same
CNN but now that CNN is going to be
played multiple times on the robot
starting in position B not position a
got it all right here we
go what's
happening moving it elbow a lot more
there's something going on with the the
robot is moving differently which is not
surprisingly it's in a pretty different
pose how is it doing how well is it
doing worse it's worse this is harder
this is a tough this is a tough task it
looks like the wrist is kind of getting
stuck it's kind of getting stuck on the
doesn't really know how to keep rolling
the wrist is getting stuck on the ground
and the robot doesn't know how to keep
rolling I love it very Valentino
brenberg esque language maybe maybe
that's helping maybe that's part of the
strategy who knows who
knows
okay all right let's look at some actual
data now rather than some video I'm
going to flip the lights back on
okay so as usual here's a plot of
evolutionary progress we have
evolutionary time on the horizontal axis
so evolving populations of cnns to do
better and better at minimizing the
overlap between C subs and C subd they
they evolved one population of CNS for
500 generations and the video you just
just saw was the most fit CTI andn from
that run then they rewound The
evolutionary tape started with a
completely different population of
random cnns evolved it again for 500
Generations got and plotted at each
moment in evolutionary time the fitness
of the best robot the best C tet in the
population at that time re rewound the
tape ran it Forward ran evolution again
a third time what happened during these
three evolutionary
trials they all kind of plateaued to 2.0
they all plateaued to 2.0 I'll leave it
as optional homework you can work
through these equations fub1 and F2 are
designed to range between zero and one
so the best the robot can get is two the
worst it can get is
zero it's doing pretty well it takes a
while but in all three cases The
evolutionary algorithm was able to
evolve a CTI andn that correctly
categorized all quote unquote 16 objects
robot doesn't know that there's not 16
we know yeah so pretty successful
actually let's dive into the brain of
one of the more successful robots so
among all those three trials this was
the best CNN and like we've seen now
many times in the minimal cognition
experiments they're going to take that
most fit CNN and play it back thousands
of times on the simulated robot in
conditions that the robot didn't see
during
Evolution you'll notice mentions of 180
rotations during Evolution they rotated
the ellipsoid to four different
horizontal rotations they played that
cerin back in the presence of 180
different horizontal rotations and
180 rotations of the sphere in in scare
quotes because obviously horizontally
rotating the sphere makes no difference
to the
robot the dashed rectangles that you see
are the C Subs C subs and C subd the
little rectangles are the r Subs sub and
the r R subd
sub what's going on in this
case what can you tell me about what's
going on in the head of this robot
during all these
experiences spher going to be a lot more
similar in like the outcome of the robot
whereas lipoids are like a lot more
sporadic absolutely right so the
bounding box for C Subs is smaller than
the one for C subd which makes sense
right there's not a lot of difference
and rotating the
sphere it's for one CN so they ran the
evolutionary algorithm at the end they
had a population of evolved cnns they
plucked out of the population the most
fit one and played it back many many
times on the robot the twoobs
inid arey
right yep what does that mean what does
that tell us about what the robot is
thinking or
feeling for 40 like for the value of 47
is that pretty much the same for both of
them yeah using 48 to distinguish the
robot's kind of showing off again right
it says I actually if you want me to
distinguish between these things I don't
even need the two neurons you gave me
just one will suffice thank you very
much when it comes to the fitness
function is there a reason they chose to
go with like a bounded Fitness function
ver like is is there like a reason that
you do that probably not they could
probably get away with not making it
bounded but I think probably just so you
can think through the math it's a little
bit easier I
think you could give it a
go other observations the rectangles
that are lying outside of both of the
dash what are the rectangles that are
lying outside of C subs and C subd what
do they
represent to be
what's going on here let's talk about
let's pick this rectangle out here what
what is this what is this rectangle
representing is that like an incorrect
categorization of an ellipsoid exactly
it's it's we know that the robot is in
the presence of an ellipsoid in this
case because it's in Black in this
figure everything that's black is the
Rob robots in the presence of an
ellipsoid everything that's gray is the
robot in the presence of a sphere so the
robot is in the presence of an ellipsoid
and it draws 47 and 48 do something out
here what does that mean what happened
in that case that particular
presentation of that rotated
ellipsoid what's the robot telling
us it doesn't know what it is doesn't
know the robot evolve the gtrn during
Evolution got
A+ perfect score we then exposed it to
more situations that it had never seen
most of the time it does the right thing
in one case it doesn't know we train an
autonomous car to distinguish between a
pedestrian right in front of it and a
shadow right in front of it the
autonomous car does perfectly during
training great let's let the autonomous
car loose on the Streets of San
Francisco
what could possibly go wrong this this
is what keeps anyone working in Ai and
Robotics up at night we cannot we do not
yet know how to guarantee that something
during training or in our case during
Evolution when deployed in the real
world in which it's going to see
situations it never saw during training
Revolution that it's always going to do
the right thing in this case the robot
doesn't know whether it's looking at a
pedestrian or a shadow we don't know
what it's going to do given that
uncertainty what else can you tell me
about this figure what else is going
on I told you that whenever the robot is
in the presence of the sphere 47 and 48
always do exactly the same thing that
was a little bit of an approximation
that's clearly not what's going on the
robot is seeing the sphere many times
but doing slightly different things
there seems to be two
clusters sphere sphere a or sphere B
sphere a sphere B good choice of words
what are these two clusters correspond
to why are there these two clusters
because of the two positions the two
position a and position B right so the
robot is ex is not completely able to
collapse intra or within category
differences the sphere doesn't feel
identical to the robot in all cases it
feel something slightly different when
it's in the presence of an a starting
from position a or sorry in the presence
of the sphere position a sphere position
B even Within These two clusters the
bounding boxes for the Spheres don't
completely overlap one
another that's actually because of a
detail of the experiment that I haven't
mentioned yet anyone can guess what it
is does it have to do with like the size
of the sphere like how the fingers kind
of curl around some of it not the sphere
is always exactly the same
size something's causing a slight
diversity slight difference in the
robot's felt experience they change the
weight they didn't change the weight of
the sphere it's it's exactly the same
sphere they keep placing it identically
under the robot's Palm how can the robot
be having slightly different
experiences
it's they could have placed it at
slightly different position under the
Palm they didn't do any of this they
added a little bit of noise to the
CNN as values were flowing in from the
sensors as vales were flowing into the
sensors they ran a a random number
generator and they change the numbers
slightly coming in and the same thing
with the numbers going out to the motors
they added a little bit of noise a
little bit of Randomness to those
numbers why do you think they did that
it's a minor detail of this experiment
but worth
mentioning uh they could be trying to
Aid Evolution so that the Rob the
evolution has to deal with slightly
different situations that's definitely
part of it does it kind of like have the
effect of normalizing so like some
inputs don't become like way more
valuable not
quite they're doing all this work in
simulation but the hope is ultimately to
run this on a real robot
I mentioned at the beginning of this
course heraclitus reminded us 2,000
years ago man never enters the same
river twice right in the real world
nothing is ever identically the same
unless we're in The Matrix we don't know
but assuming we're not things are always
slightly different in our experience
that's them sort of the investigators
being optimistic that someday this might
be try it on a real robot so they're
just trying to make this a little bit
more
realistic so far so good
okay let's keep going so we can finish
up this lecture
today we just saw this case this was the
best evolved controller from the first
of those three uh from the first of
those three
runs this is the best evolved controller
the best evolved CN from the second
evolutionary run this ctrnn also got a
perfect score during Evolution what's
going on in this case
they've drawn things a little bit
differently in this case my apologies on
behalf of the investigators imagine C
Subs drawn around these boxes and
imagine C subd drawn around these
boxes the gray and the black do not
overlap that's good that's what we
want
it could right it hasn't magnified
intercategory differences very well the
sphere and the ellipsoid feel very
similar to the robot this may be
difficult to see from the back look at
the ranges of the values on 47 and 48
they're really
tiny 47 and 48 are actually not changing
in value very much during this last 5%
of the robot's experience with the
objects maybe maybe it's it's actually
making these B these bounding boxes are
actually globally speaking very very
small right for some reason that seems
to be helpful for the robot to keep
these boxes from not overlapping so
they're probably wasn't pressure to make
these the areas of these boxes large
here's another here's another case over
here here's the second best CNN from the
second evolutionary run which also got a
perfect score during Evolution there is
also no overlap between these but these
boxes again are really really close to
one another an example of evolution
being a satisficer not an Optimizer or
you know it did what it was called it
min overlap but it didn't do the optimal
thing to also like maximize distance
between the two yes this is an example
of The evolutionary algorithm being a
satisficer not an Optimizer all you told
me to do was not not overlap these boxes
and I didn't you never said anything in
the fitness function about maximizing
the distance between them I'm doing
exactly what you asked for and nothing
else look at this one this is the third
best CNN from the second trial what's
going on in this
case small the sphere bounding box is
really really small it's really
reducing intra category differences the
sphere in A and B feel really really
similar to the
robot okay that's the last slide from
this lecture before we switch mental
gears and talk about
Locomotion cam was just saying
intuitively maybe it makes sense to push
these bounding boxes further away so
let's take two minutes and rewrite this
Fitness function in our head and then
mentally simulate an evolutionary
algorithm running with this altered
Fitness function if we added a term to
the fitness function that rewarded for
maximum distance between the centers of
the bound in box what is what are we
telling Evolution we're building in our
bias or our opinions about what what the
difference between spheres and
ellipsoids
is the investigators didn't do
this they didn't include this additional
term that maximize distance between Cs
and CD one issue with that is that it
would not NE necessarily like the you
could have a huge bounding box it could
be like really far away and that would
be really big and then you might not be
minimizing inner category differences
maybe maybe other
ideas um I suppose we're like suggesting
that a Speer can roll a lot better than
the lipoid so that's why it would be
able to figure out that the spere is
going roll like a lot further away
getting closer we're not necessarily
telling the robot or the CNN that
spheres are more rollable than
ellipsoids because it's up to the robot
to decide what to do it didn't in this
experiment but could it easily it could
have easily grabbed the object and
banged it up and down on the table a few
times I don't know whether that would
reduce intracategory differences and
exaggerate inter category differences
but it's a perfectly valid there's
nothing in the fitness function that
says You must roll the object other
ideas um if you told her a lot to do
that because these are so subtly
different it probably would increase the
rate that you might roll something along
the wrong end and not be able to make a
subtle distin between
two uh one thing you mentioned is
certainly true which is the robot would
no longer it would there would not it
would not feel a subtle difference
between these objects assuming a c tier
and N could evolve to support that
Fitness function that ellipsoid and
sphere would feel very different to the
robot but for such a
CNN I was I was going to say like if the
end goal of not this experiment but just
in general was to be able to categorize
like a set of objects it's probably
pretty nice that a sphere and ellipsoid
are in the same like category versus
like a triangle or like a prism okay
you've anticipated my next question so
I'm G to more or less repeat Verbatim
what you said let's imagine we rerun
this experiment and now we expose the
robot during evolution to ellipsoids
spheres and
cubes let's not change anything about
the experiment except well we've changed
the experiment by adding cubes change
the fitness
function how do we want the robot to
distinguish between ellipsoids spheres
and
cubes how do we modify the fitness
function just high level we don't even
need any math what's the
intuition
determine if it's like a cube or an
ellipsoid sphere first and then
determine if it's you know based on what
tree it takes it's either a cube or it's
use this Fitness function okay we could
design a fitness function that causes
the robot to categorize hierarchically
figure out first of all whether you're
in the presence of a sphere ellipsoid or
a cube and if you decide you're in the
presence of a SP sphere SL ellipsoid
tell me which of those two it is could
go that way if I were to ask you and you
can tell me with language luckily which
of those three objects ellipsoid sphere
and cube is different from the more
different from the other two which one
doesn't belong what would you tell me
presumably are we all in agreement it's
the cube right there's something about
humans that we actually agree in this
case we are aligned in the the new
language of AI we have value alignment
in that problem so we probably want to
teach this robot or evolve this robot to
feel that ellipsoids and spheres are
more similar to one another than either
is to a cube how do we alter the fitness
function for
that what do we want to see in these
three bounding boxes we're going to draw
for sphere ellipsoid and
Cube we want them all to be mutually
nonoverlapping but we would like the
cube to be further away from the sphere
or the ellipsoid so coming back to
something cam mentioned a few minutes
back is actually the distances between
these boxes we could manipulate this so
that the robot learns semantic
relationships similarly to humans we
could end up making this robot more
anthropomorphic it not only looks like
us but it experiences the world like we
do if you blindfolded grasp uh
ellipsoids and spheres they're going to
feel more similar than a cube does make
sense okay all right we've got 10
minutes left so let's pull out of active
categorical perception and the minimal
cognition experiments uh and dive into
Locomotion
okay we're only going to start to
scratch the surface of this topic today
it is a long and fascinating topic there
are whole courses course series on
biomechanics so we're going to treat
this at a very high level um one of my
favorite books of all time is the
principles of animal Locomotion written
by Alexander and one of my lab members
currently has this book and I've
forgotten who it is one of those lab
members is actually here today uh if I
had this book I would have passed it
around so you can all have a look it's
all good I'll give you the Cole's notes
of principles of animal Locomotion I
love this book because Alexander goes
through in one book more or less every
single way that Mother Nature has
discovered to get animals from point A
to point B he starts at the beginning of
the book with some of the basic physics
we need to think about uh Locomotion
goes into obviously the single building
block every single animal uses to move
there is one cell type more or less we
all use to move it's the muscle cell
okay this has come up a few times the
energetics of locomotion um as you've
probably noticed your three link robot
is not very energy efficient it can
under the right conditions bounce all
over the place generally not a good way
to get from point A to point uh B goes
into all the different aspects of the
physical body that affect your ability
to move from point A to point B and then
goes into all the different ways Mother
Nature has figured out to move animals
from point A to point B starting with
some of the earliest and simplest cases
like
peristalsis so the humble earthworm
expands the front of its body which ends
up being an anchor uh where it presses
against the inside walls of the earth
that it's moving through it contracts
the back of its body so the back of its
body loses contact with the tunnel and
causes the back of the body to contract
forward when it does it relaxes and
expands another part of its body and as
this wave of expansion moves from the
front of the animal towards the back the
animal actually moves forward this is
peristalsis we do not move with
peristalsis but you have peristalsis
going on in you all the time where is
it kind of here a little bit here more
elsewhere a little bit in the
intestines throat when you swallow
anything peristalsis pushes the food
back this little hack this combination
of shape deformation changing shape and
geometry and how things change over time
this little phenomenon is super helpful
and mother nature discovered it a very
long time ago and she's copy and pasted
and adapted that mechanism into all
sorts of animals all over the
place walking running and hopping this
is where we as humans tend to feel more
uh comfortable climbing and jumping this
particular primate the Gibbon is very
good at brachiation swinging from Branch
to Branch Homo sapiens sapiens were not
so good at it you can spend years
training and you can get better at it
but nowhere near as good as the Gibbon I
highly recommend getting on YouTube and
Googling videos of Gibbons brachiating
it's fantastic crawling and burrowing
something humans don't tend to do very
much gliding and soaring we need
machines for this hovering powered
forward flight moving on the surface of
water swimming with ores and hydro foils
Swimming by un undulation Swimming by
jet propulsion who swims by jet
propulsion octopus octopus the seapods
and so on right incredible diversity in
the ways in which Mother Nature has
found to get animals from point B point
A to point B I want to back up for a
moment this is going to Anchor our
discussion for next time all of this
diversity is Mother Nature trying to
strike different kinds of balances
between four antagonistic forces that
are at work the moment an animal starts
to move from point A to point B there is
no optimal way to move from A to B there
are just different trade-offs that you
can strike in the way that you do it
these trade-offs are summarized as
displacement robustness energy and
stability an animal that evolves to
maximize displacement and ignore these
other three deera how is that animal
moving regardless of whether it's on
land sea or air uh it's like sprinting
it's sprinting right so the minute you
sprint you're straight you're you're
choosing a particular way to get from
point A to point B you're striking a
pretty extreme
tradeoff an animal that values
robustness over the other
three robust to what do you think it's
not mentioned here like forms movement
like not just straightforward and
backwards but like in other planes could
be could be the like the way the
directions in which you move usually
when robustness is mentioned during the
biomechanics of motion it's robustness
to the
environments you might move through if
you're moving over land it's differences
in friction and uh structure of the
ground over which you're moving are you
moving over ice are you moving over a
Boulder Field are you moving through a
field of wheat are you moving through
can you be robust can you continue
moving in the way that you normally move
under all those different
environments again as humans we can sort
of tune how we move how do you choose to
move so that you maximize robustness it
certainly ain't by sprinting not a good
solution you sacrifice robustness the
matter the moment you try and maximize
displacement I don't know how icy it is
out there
today you take little baby steps and
kind of yeah that this actually works
pretty well for pretty much most
environments you can imagine right
walking over ice walking over thin ice
good strategy
what about uh animals or humans that
prioritize energy over the
rest walking walking we evolved by petal
Locomotion we Homo sapiens sapiens are
the master the uncontested master of
moving where we maximize energy and
don't care about the rest I think I
mentioned this already there's a theory
out there about early hominids that one
of the things that made us successful is
that we hunted in packs and we did it by
just walking get a bunch of your friends
walk have the ones on the outer side
walk a little bit faster and if you keep
doing this all day you can actually
bring down some of the megap uh in North
Africa it's possible I don't recommend
it but it's possible we can sweat we're
very energy efficient we basically uh
counter our energy against the other
strategies of megap on the plains of
Africa which is they tend to maximize
displacement right run away
quickly what about
stability we are terrible at this one
how many of you seen somebody slip on
the ice this this winter right we're not
so good at this
one the minute we focused on this one
with bipedal locomotion we really gave
up on this one my 2-year-old at home is
still struggling with with this
one which animals are really good at
this one and terrible at the other
three four-legged animals four-legged
animals actually they're better than us
everybody's better than us but even
four-legged animals not so good you ever
seen deer jump on the road icy Road they
also wipe out they're not
great snake doesn't
BCE absolutely right worms snakes
reptiles excellent at stability for the
simple reason they can't fall down
why would you ever evolve away from
snake likee or reptilian Locomotion if
you've got four legs splay out
horizontally like the reptiles do and
you can never fall
over why evolve into
us why evolve into mammals that move
away from the strategy no pun
intend you can move faster and Traverse
like you can go up
can go vertically a lot better uh true
right so we as hominids as primates we
can climb although reptiles are pretty
good at climbing too snakes you wouldn't
think it but they're also pretty good do
it end being moreal to
Havey if you think about it right you
can try this don't do it with anyone
around but you can get down on your
belly and crawl around it's it's
exhausting right you're literally
dragging
the your body along the ground friction
is draining your energy it's extremely
energy inefficient to move in this way
there is no optimal way to move every
way of moving is just is just a tradeoff
okay I think that's a good place to
pause for today you have a quiz due
tonight undergrads are working on A7
grads you're working on D2 see you here
in class on Thursday